

When we communicate, we are sharing information. 
• This sharing can be local or remote. 
• Between individuals, local communication usually 
occurs face to face, while remote communication 
takes place over distance.
• The term telecommunication, which includes 
telephony, 
telegraphy, 
and 
television, 
means 
communication at a distance (tele is Greek for “far”).
• The word data refers to information presented in 
whatever form is agreed upon by the parties creating 
and using the data.
Dr.Ananth Kumar M.S., Assistant Professor, 
Department of ECE, CMRIT.
5
• Data communications are the exchange of data 
between two devices via some form of 
transmission medium such as a wire cable. 
• For data communications to occur, the 
communicating devices must be part of a 
communication system made up of a combination 
of hardware (physical equipment) and software 
(programs). 
• The effectiveness of a data communications 
system 
depends 
on 
four 
fundamental 
characteristics: delivery, accuracy, timeliness, and 
jitter.
Dr.Ananth Kumar M.S., Assistant Professor, 
Department of ECE, CMRIT.
6
1.
2.
3.
4.
Delivery: The system must deliver data to the correct 
destination. Data must be received by the intended device or 
user and only by that device or user.
Accuracy: The system must deliver the data accurately. Data that 
have been altered in transmission and left uncorrected are 
unusable. 
Timeliness: The system must deliver data in a timely manner. 
Data delivered late are useless. In the case of video and audio, 
timely delivery means delivering data as they are produced, in 
the same order that they are produced, and without significant 
delay. This kind of delivery is called real-time transmission. 
Jitter: Jitter refers to the variation in the packet arrival time. It is 
the uneven delay in the delivery of audio or video packets. For 
example, let us assume that video packets are sent every 30 ms. 
If some of the packets arrive with 30-ms delay and others with 
40-ms delay, an uneven quality in the video is the result.
Dr.Ananth Kumar M.S., Assistant Professor, 
Department of ECE, CMRIT.
7
1.1.1 Components
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
A data communications system has five components (see Figure 1.1).
Message: The message is the information (data) to be communicated. 
Popular forms of information include text, numbers, pictures, audio, and 
video. 
Sender: The sender is the device that sends the data message. It can be 
a computer, workstation, telephone handset, video camera, and so on.
Receiver: The receiver is the device that receives the message. It can be 
a computer, workstation, telephone handset, television, and so on. 
Transmission medium: The transmission medium is the physical path by 
which a message travels from sender to receiver. Some examples of 
transmission media include twisted-pair wire, coaxial cable, fiber-optic 
cable, and radio waves. 
Protocol: A protocol is a set of rules that govern data communications. It 
represents an agreement between the communicating devices. Without 
a protocol, two devices may be connected but not communicating, just 
as a person speaking French cannot be understood by a person who 
speaks only Japanese.
Dr.Ananth Kumar M.S., Assistant Professor, 
Department of ECE, CMRIT.
8
Dr.Ananth Kumar M.S., Assistant Professor, 
Department of ECE, CMRIT.
9
1.1.2 Data Representation
• Information today comes in different forms such as text, numbers, 
images, audio, and video.
• Text: 
In data communications, text is represented as a bit pattern, a 
sequence of bits (0s or 1s). 
Different sets of bit patterns have been designed to represent text 
symbols. 
Each set is called a code, and the process of representing symbols 
is called coding. 
Today, the prevalent coding system is called Unicode, which uses 
32 bits to represent a symbol or character used in any language in 
the world. 
The American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII), 
developed some decades ago in the United States, now 
constitutes the first 127 characters in Unicode and is also referred 
to as Basic Latin.
Dr.Ananth Kumar M.S., Assistant Professor, 
Department of ECE, CMRIT.
10
• Numbers:
Numbers are also represented by bit patterns.
However, a code such as ASCII is not used to represent 
numbers; the number is directly converted to a binary 
number to simplify mathematical operations.
• Images:
Images are also represented by bit patterns. 
In its simplest form, an image is composed of a matrix 
of pixels (picture elements), where each pixel is a 
small dot. 
The size of the pixel depends on the resolution. For 
example, an image can be divided into 1000 pixels or 
10,000 pixels. In the second case, there is a better 
representation of the image (better resolution), but 
more memory is needed to store the image.
Dr.Ananth Kumar M.S., Assistant Professor, 
Department of ECE, CMRIT.
11
After an image is divided into pixels, each pixel is assigned a bit pattern. 
The size and the value of the pattern depend on the image. For an image 
made of only black and-white dots (e.g., a chessboard), a 1-bit pattern is 
enough to represent a pixel. 
If an image is not made of pure white and pure black pixels, we can 
increase the size of the bit pattern to include gray scale. 
For example, to show four levels of gray scale, we can use 2-bit patterns. A 
black pixel can be represented by 00, a dark gray pixel by 01, a light gray 
pixel by 10, and a white pixel by 11. 
There are several methods to represent color images. One method is 
called RGB, so called because each color is made of a combination of three 
primary colors: red, green, and blue. 
The intensity of each color is measured, and a bit pattern is assigned to it. 
Another method is called YCM, in which a color is made of a combination 
of three other primary colors: yellow, cyan, and magenta.
Dr.Ananth Kumar M.S., Assistant Professor, 
Department of ECE, CMRIT.
12
• Audio: 
Audio refers to the recording or 
broadcasting of sound or music. 
Audio is by nature different from 
text, numbers, or images. 
It is continuous, not discrete. Even 
when we use a microphone to 
change voice or music to an electric 
signal, we create a continuous signal.
Dr.Ananth Kumar M.S., Assistant Professor, 
Department of ECE, CMRIT.
13
• Video: 
Video refers to the recording or 
broadcasting of a picture or movie. 
Video can either be produced as a 
continuous entity (e.g., by a TV 
camera), or it can be a combination 
of images, each a discrete entity, 
arranged to convey the idea of 
motion.
Dr.Ananth Kumar M.S., Assistant Professor, 
Department of ECE, CMRIT.
14
1.1.3 Data Flow
• Communication between two devices can be simplex, 
half-duplex, or full-duplex as shown in Figure 1.2.
• Simplex: 
In simplex mode, the communication is unidirectional, as on 
a one-way street. 
Only one of the two devices on a link can transmit; the 
other can only receive (see Figure 1.2a). 
Keyboards and traditional monitors are examples of simplex 
devices. 
The keyboard can only introduce input; the monitor can 
only accept output. 
The simplex mode can use the entire capacity of the 
channel to send data in one direction.
Dr.Ananth Kumar M.S., Assistant Professor, 
Department of ECE, CMRIT.
15
Dr.Ananth Kumar M.S., Assistant Professor, 
Department of ECE, CMRIT.
16
• Half-Duplex: 
In half-duplex mode, each station can both transmit and receive, 
but not at the same time. 
When one device is sending, the other can only receive, and vice 
versa (see Figure 1.2b). 
The half-duplex mode is like a one-lane road with traffic allowed in 
both directions. When cars are traveling in one direction, cars 
going the other way must wait. 
In a half-duplex transmission, the entire capacity of a channel is 
taken over by whichever of the two devices is transmitting at the 
time. 
Walkie-talkies and CB (citizens band) radios are both half-duplex 
systems. 
The half-duplex mode is used in cases where there is no need for 
communication in both directions at the same time; the entire 
capacity of the channel can be utilized for each direction.
Dr.Ananth Kumar M.S., Assistant Professor, 
Department of ECE, CMRIT.
17
• Full-Duplex: 
In full-duplex mode (also called duplex), both stations can transmit 
and receive simultaneously (see Figure 1.2c). 
The full-duplex mode is like a two-way street with traffic flowing in 
both directions at the same time. 
In full-duplex mode, signals going in one direction share the 
capacity of the link with signals going in the other direction. 
This sharing can occur in two ways: Either the link must contain 
two physically separate transmission paths, one for sending and 
the other for receiving; or the capacity of the channel is divided 
between signals traveling in both directions. 
One common example of full-duplex communication is the 
telephone network. When two people are communicating by a 
telephone line, both can talk and listen at the same time. 
The full-duplex mode is used when communication in both 
directions is required all the time. The capacity of the channel, 
however, must be divided between the two directions.
